Collaborative Urban Information Systems: A Web Services approach
  Raj Singh, PhD Candidate
  Committee: Joe Ferreira, Lewis Hopkins, Lorlene Hoyt

The way planners gather and analyze information is archaic and extremely expensive. It has been this way for decades, and things don’t seem to be getting any better. Few ever dispute the common saying that 80-percent of any analysis effort is spent simply gathering data, but the solution to this problem has been elusive. Still, we continually strive to solve the information management problem, because the status quo “just feels wrong.”

A host of other urban information systems just feel wrong too, such as the lack of collaboration among experts; the difficulty in sharing information between and within organizations; or the dearth of personal knowledge in urban information systems. This research starts with the hypothesis that these problems are all related and systemic, and that a new paradigm of information management is needed if we can hope to address them effectively. We have for too long overlooked the medieval data gathering practices common at all levels of government. Corporations have moved into the 21st century with integrated information systems that connect businesses with upstream and downstream trading partners, so that data is no longer re-processed when it moves from one organization to another. The planning community on the other hand, still operates like traders at a bazaar, making deals, bartering, mixing and matching the data sources that form the foundation of our analytic systems.

The research is divided into two main sections. In the first, we develop a theory about how information flows within and across planning organizations, and how this plays out in the MassGIS buildout analysis (a recent, widely-deployed growth model). In the second, we re-architect the urban information framework, guided by our new theoretical foundation. This new framework is based on Web services, an emerging technology for connecting information systems across organizations. It is called the Planning Analysis and Modeling Markup Language framework, or simply PAMML (rhymes with camel), and it consists of an information processing vocabulary expressed in XML schema, a suite of Web services based on that schema, and guidance on how to best use the framework to encourage the interconnection of planning and mainstream information technology.